---
id: alq
title: Auto Liquidator
---

SynFutures@v1 introduces the concept of “ALQ (Auto Liquidator)”, who passively performs the role of the liquidator by providing liquidity only and earns trading fees. In V1, sAMM is the liquidator at the same time. With that,  for the first time in DEX to our knowledge, partial liquidation of a trader’s leveraged position becomes possible.

`liquidateByAmm`: To lower the liquidity requirement, liquidation initiators could utilize this function to force the liquidated account to trade with AMM with the same price logic as the _trade_ function. Note that if the position that needs to be liquidated causes excessive price fluctuations in AMM after being traded to AMM, the liquidation process will fail. That is, all the constraints in _trade_ function still apply here. Similarly, after forcing the liquidated account to close a certain amount of positions, the account balance of the liquidated account may become negative. Same as above, insurance fund and social loss will become the resort. LiquidateByAmm will give the liquidation initiator a fixed reward,  same as the operation to update contract status. It is worth mentioning that since AMM has always maintained liquidity in the system, partial liquidation becomes feasible under this operation:  unlike _liquidate_ function that takes over all positions of the liquidated account, with liquidateByAMM, the size of liquidated position would be margin/price(IMR-penalty) instead, that is, the account will be liquidated to a safe state that meets the initial margin requirement.